title: Publications
slug: publications

<br/>

**People Meet People: A Microlevel Approach to Predicting the Effect of Policies on the
Spread of COVID-19 (2020)**

*with Janos Gabler and Klara Röhrl*

Governments worldwide are adopting nuanced policy measures to reduce the number of
Covid-19 cases with minimal social and economic costs. Epidemiological models have a
hard time predicting the effects of such fine grained policies. We propose a novel
simulation-based model to address this shortcoming. We build on state-of-the-art
agent-based simulation models but replace the way contacts between susceptible and
infected people take place. Firstly, we allow for heterogeneity in the types of contacts
(e.g. recurrent or random) and in the infectiousness of each contact type. Secondly, we
strictly separate the number of contacts from the probabilities that a contact leads to
an infection. The number of contacts changes with social distancing policies, the
infection probabilities remain invariant. This allows us to model many types of fine
grained policies that cannot easily be incorporated into other models. To validate our
model, we show that it can accurately predict the effect of the German November lockdown
even if no similar policy has been observed in the time series that were used to
estimate the model parameters.

- [PDF](https://www.iza.org/publications/dp/13899)

<br/>

**Die Bedeutung individuellen Verhaltens über den Jahreswechsel für die
Weiterentwicklung der Covid-19-Pandemie in Deutschland**

*with Janos Gabler, Klara Röhrl, & Hans-Martin von Gaudecker*

Wir nutzen ein neues Modell, um den Verlauf der Covid-19-Pandemie über die
Weihnachtstage und den Jahreswechsel vorherzusagen. Während die weitgehende Schließung
der Betriebe neben den verlängerten Schulferien die Infektionszahlen drücken, werden
Reiseaktivitäten und Weihnachtsfeiern zu einem starken Anstieg führen. Unsere Ergebnisse
geben wenig Anlass zur Hoffnung, dass die Infektionszahlen über die Weihnachtstage und
den Jahreswechsel nennenswert zurückgehen. Eher dürfte das Gegenteil der Fall sein.
Einen großen Effekt kann die private Kontaktnachverfolgung ausmachen. Wenn alle
Teilnehmer von Weihnachtsfeierlichkeiten über einen später auftretenden
Infektionsverdacht (Symptome oder positiver Test) umgehend benachrichtigt werden und
ihre Kontakte reduzieren, könnten mehrere hunderttausend Infektionen in der ersten
Januarhälfte vermieden werden.

- [PDF](https://www.iza.org/publications/s/99/)

<br/>

**Wenn Menschen (keine) Menschen treffen: Simulation der Auswirkungen von
Politikmaßnahmen zur Eindämmung der zweiten Covid-19-Welle (2020)**

*with Dorn, F., Gabler, J., von Gaudecker, H. M., Peichl, A., & Röhrl, K.*

Mit Hilfe eines neu entwickelten mikrobasierten Modells simulieren wir die Wirkung
verschiedener kontaktreduzierender Politikmaßnahmen. Unsere Ergebnisse zeigen, dass eine
Verlängerung des bisherigen Lockdown-light die Zahl der Neuinfektionszahlen in den
nächsten Wochen nur sehr langsam reduzieren würde. Bis Weihnachten würde der
Inzidenzwert deutschlandweit nicht unter 75 fallen. Um die Inzidenz über
Kontaktbeschränkungen weiter zu reduzieren, diskutiert die Politik Optionen, die von
verschiedenen Verschärfungen der Restriktionen in Bildungseinrichtungen oder im
Einzelhandel bis hin zu weitgehenden Kontakt- und Ausgangsbeschränkungen reichen. Eine
Option ist die Einführung von Wechselklassen bzw. digitalem Fernunterricht. Unsere
Analysen zeigen, dass eine solche Einschränkung des Schulbetriebs ausreichen könnte, um
bis Weihnachten den 7-Tageinzidenzwert von 50 zu unterschreiten.

- [PDF](https://www.ifo.de/publikationen/2020/aufsatz-zeitschrift/wenn-menschen-keine-menschen-treffen-simulation)

<br/>

**Early Identification of College Dropouts Using Machine-Learning: Conceptual
Considerations and an Empirical Example (2019)**

*Joint work with [Ingo Ispording](https://sites.google.com/view/ingoeisphording),
published in IZA Research Report No. 89.*

Can and should we use modern big data methods to predict which students will drop out of
their studies? Such an early detection of at-risk groups of students would allow
practitioners and policy-makers to timely intervene through targeted counter-measures as
for instance mentoring, counseling, or institutional support. This report discusses the
feasibility, benefits and potential hidden costs of such an approach which would allow
to mitigate substantial costs of educational career frictions.

- [PDF](http://ftp.iza.org/report_pdfs/iza_report_89.pdf)
